# Installation and setup

PyPDFForm is available on PyPI and can be installed using pip, which is the most common and recommended tool.

## Prerequisites

PyPDFForm officially supports Python 3.10 and newer versions that are currently in their active life cycles. This typically includes the minimum supported version and the four major versions above it. For details on Python version life cycles, refer to [this page](https://devguide.python.org/versions/).

**NOTE:** While official support is limited to active Python versions, PyPDFForm generally avoids features specific to particular major Python versions. It is expected to be functional with Python 3.7+ (due to its use of [Postponed Evaluation of Annotations](https://peps.python.org/pep-0563/) for type hints, introduced in Python 3.7), though these versions are not actively tested.

## Install using pip

It is highly recommended to create a virtual environment before installation. Then, run the following command to install PyPDFForm:

```shell
pip install PyPDFForm
```

To upgrade PyPDFForm and all its dependencies, run:

```shell
pip install -U PyPDFForm
```

## Create a PDF wrapper

The main user interface of the library is the `PdfWrapper` class. It implements most PyPDFForm APIs and accepts various optional parameters, the most important of which is the PDF form template.

For example, to use [this PDF](pdfs/sample_template.pdf) as a template, instantiate the `PdfWrapper` object as follows:

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template.pdf")
```

PyPDFForm provides an adapter for different file interaction methods in Python, which allows you to pass your PDF form to `PdfWrapper` as a file path, an open file object, or a `bytes` file stream.

This means the following two snippets are equivalent to the above:

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

with open("sample_template.pdf", "rb+") as template:
    pdf = PdfWrapper(template)
```

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

with open("sample_template.pdf", "rb+") as template:
    pdf = PdfWrapper(template.read())
```

This file adaptation applies to all PyPDFForm APIs. You can replace file path parameters with file objects or streams throughout the documentation.

**NOTE:** The `PdfWrapper` class does NOT handle appearance streams by default. Read more about it [in the next section](#handling-appearance-streams).

## Handling Appearance Streams

In order for PDF forms filled programmatically to be displayed properly, especially for text fields, an appearance stream, which tells any PDF viewers how a PDF form field should be rendered in a raw way, needs to be generated for each field.

PyPDFForm supports two different flags for handling appearance streams, both of which are set when instantiating the `PdfWrapper` object.

The first flag is `need_appearances`. By setting it to `True`, you are telling the PDF viewer/editor that's opening the PDF form generated by this object to, if capable, generate appearance streams for each field:

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template.pdf", need_appearances=True)
```

Alternatively, you can use PyPDFForm's own appearance stream generation functionality by setting the `generate_appearance_streams` flag to `True`:

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template.pdf", generate_appearance_streams=True)
```

Exactly which one to use is situational. In many cases, `need_appearances` is superior when you are viewing the output PDF forms in proprietary PDF softwares like Adobe Acrobat, as they likely provide very sophisticated appearance stream generation logics.

On the other hand, if you are viewing the output PDF forms in PDF softwares that do not support generating appearance streams, it is better to set the `generate_appearance_streams` flag and have PyPDFForm do it. Please note though the functionality offered by PyPDFForm as its current state is not perfect and still requires further testing and refinement.

## Use full name for PDF form fields

According to section 12.7.3.2 of the [PDF standard](https://opensource.adobe.com/dc-acrobat-sdk-docs/pdfstandards/PDF32000_2008.pdf) (page 434), PDF form fields can have fully qualified names constructed using the pattern `<parent_field_name>.<field_name>`.

PyPDFForm allows you to access fields by their full names by setting `use_full_widget_name` to `True` when instantiating `PdfWrapper`. For example, to use [this PDF](pdfs/sample_template_with_full_key.pdf):

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template_with_full_key.pdf", use_full_widget_name=True)
```

This enables accessing fields by their full names. For instance, you can access the checkbox labeled `Gain de 2 classes` using its full name `Gain de 2 classes.0` instead of its partial name `0`.

**NOTE:** When using full names, the `update_widget_key` and `commit_widget_key_updates` methods of `PdfWrapper` are disabled and raise a `NotImplementedError` because full names involve both the field and its parent.

## Write to a file

`PdfWrapper` behaves like an open file object, allowing you to write the PDF to another file object. For example, to write to a disk file:

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template.pdf")

with open("output.pdf", "wb+") as output:
    output.write(pdf.read())
```

It doesn't have to be a disk file; it can be a memory buffer as well:

```python
from io import BytesIO
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template.pdf")

with BytesIO() as output:
    output.write(pdf.read())
```

In addition to behaving like a file object, `PdfWrapper` also implements a `write` method that allows you to write the PDF to a disk file by specifying the path:

```python
from PyPDFForm import PdfWrapper

pdf = PdfWrapper("sample_template.pdf")
pdf.write("output.pdf")
```
